README.md, before:

# SubTite: Easy way to create and add subtitles for your videos

![Latest Build Status](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)

**TLDR:** SubTite allows you to create subtitles using auto-transcription and edit them seamlessly in a video editor. The subtitles can be output as a separate SRT file, or combined with the video. Existing SRT files can be imported and edited effortlessly. The subtitles can be positioned in 9 different locations along the video. Support for trimming video, adding images, and other video editing features coming soon!

## GUI Demo
![gif demo](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/assets/29148427/c2afaac0-5111-4f7e-ad38-69b7f9757ad3)

## Feature Overview (Current v1.0.5)
* Supports Windows and Linux
* GUI + CLI for adding subtitles
* Subtitle Auto-transcription through MS Cognitive Services (windows only for now)
* Intuitive interface to make subtitling as fast and pain-free as possible
* Full UTF-8 Unicode support on Windows and Linux
* Subtitles can be positioned in 9 different locations: top right, middle center, bottom left etc.
* Added subtitles can immediately be previewed in a video player on the fly
* Existing subtitles (.srt) can be loaded and easily edited
* Video with subtitles can be exported either by remuxing to mkv or burning subtitles into the mp4.

## Installation

### To use the GUI
Download the appropriate binaries from the [releases section](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/releases)

### To use the CLI
Please refer to the [CLI docs](subtitler/cli/README.md)

## Usage

### Subtitle Editing
1. Select the video from the file dialog.
2. Select the subtitle file from the next file dialog. You can create a new subtitle file to start from scratch, or use an existing (.srt) file.
3. Position the yellow indicator at the subtitle's start position.
4. Right-click and select "Add interval at position".
5. Enter the subtitle text on the pane to the right.
6. (Optional) Select the subtitle position from one of the 9 positions.
7. Use mouse to adjust the subtitle's start and end time. Any changes are saved automatically.
8. Select `File > Export` if you want to combine the video and subtitles!

### Auto Transcription (Windows only for now)
1. Create a free [Microsoft Azure Account](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/free/cognitive-services/) (although it is free, they will require a credit card).
2. Create a [free speech resource](https://ms.portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.CognitiveServicesSpeechServices) in the Azure portal. Make sure to pick the free (F0) pricing tier! As of time of writing, this should give you 5 hours of free subtitle transcription per month.
3. Now you should have 2 API keys under "Keys and Endpoint" on the Azure portal. Copy one of them.
4. In subtite, select `Subtitle > Auto Transcribe`. Copy in your keys and also the Region of your speech instance. (For example, westus)
5. Enter a password to remember this information for next time. The password is ~~used~~ to encrypt the API keys to store on your local disk, and it is never passed anywhere else except to the Microsoft servers.
6. Choose the output location where the auto-transcribed subtitles will be saved.
7. Wait for your audio to be processed for auto-transcription!

## Building from source
SubTite uses Bazel v7.4.1 as the main build system. Setup your environment by [installing Bazelisk](https://bazel.build/install/bazelisk), which will use our [.bazelversion](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/blob/master/.bazelversion) file to pick the right version of Bazel.

### Windows

#### Dependency installation
Compiling for windows requires MSVC 2019. You can download ["Build Tools for Visual Studio"](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) to get the 2019 compiler.

With bazel setup, here are some sample commands for building the CLI.

```bash
$ bazel build --config=vs2019-prod //subtitler/cli:cli # Build CLI in release mode using MSVC2019
```

#### QT
Building the GUI requires QT 5.15.2 to be installed on your machine. We recommend using [aqtinstall](https://github.com/miurahr/aqtinstall) to make this easier. Run the following commands:

```bash
# Install aqt via pip
python -m pip install aqtinstall

# Confirm that win64_msvc2019_64 is available
python -m aqt list-qt windows desktop --arch 5.15.2 

# Install qt and all modules
python -m aqt install-qt windows desktop 5.15.2 win64_msvc2019_64 -m all
```

Next, find the directory where the directory `Qt\5.15.2\msvc2019_64\...` is installed. 

* Add `QT5_INSTALL_PATH` to your env variables, pointed at the `msvc2019_64` directory.
* Also add `QT_ROOT_DIR` to your env variables, pointed at the same directory.

#### Microsoft Speech Services SDK
We also require the Microsoft Speech Services SDK v1.47 to be installed. Use NuGet to install it in Powershell.

```pwsh
Register-PackageSource -Name nuget.org -Location https://www.nuget.org/api/v2 -ProviderName NuGet -Force

Install-Package Microsoft.CognitiveServices.Speech -ProviderName NuGet -RequiredVersion 1.47.0 -Force
```

Now you should see the files available at:

```
C:\\Program Files\\PackageManagement\\NuGet\\Packages\\Microsoft.CognitiveServices.Speech.1.47.0
```

Now you should be able to build the dev version of the GUI by running:

```bash
./build_gui_dev.sh
```

If you want to build the production version of the GUI, you'll also need to install ResourceHacker (details below).

#### Resource Hacker

Note that production builds will require one more depedency: [ResourceHacker](https://www.angusj.com/resourcehacker/). We use ResourceHacker
to set the icon for our binary. Download the ResourceHacker.exe and add it to your PATH variable.

Now you can compile the release binary via:

```bash
SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH=/path/to/output/folder; ./deploy/deploy.sh
```

### Linux

Compiling for linux requires GCC.

With bazel setup, here are some sample commands for building the CLI.

```bash
$ bazel build --config=gcc-prod //subttiler/cli:cli    # Build CLI in release mode using GCC
```

To compile the GUI, you will need to install various dependencies. 

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y qtbase5-dev qtchooser qt5-qmake qtbase5-dev-tools \
  qtmultimedia5-dev qttools5-dev-tools \
  libva-dev libsodium-dev
```

This should install QT 5 to one of the following locations.

```
/usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu/qt5
or
/usr/include/qt
```

Now SubTite can be built all from one command:

```bash
bazel clean --expunge && ./build_gui_dev.sh
```
It is recommended to use the build script instead of compiling manually, since the build script ensures the correct runtime dependencies are copied to the right places. If the script doesn't work for you, here's how to compile manually.

---
First, `bazel build --config=gcc-prod //subtitler/gui:main`

Next, copy `bazel-subtitler/external/ffmpeg_linux/bin/ffmpeg` into `bazel-bin/subtitler/gui`. You should be ready to go from here.

## Build configs

The following build options are configured in [.bazelrc](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/blob/master/.bazelrc) of this project:
1. `--config=vs2019-prod`. MSVC release mode
2. `--config=vs2019-asan`. MSVC debug mode, with address sanitizer
3. `--config=vs2019`. MSVC with bazel default settings (fastest build times)

`--config=gcc-prod`, `--config=gcc-asan`, and `--config=gcc` are the same as above, except it is for building on Linux using gcc.

Unit tests can be run using
```bash
$ bazel test --config=vs2019-asan ... # used for running on windows
$ bazel test --config=gcc-asan ...    # used for running on linux
```

## Deploying - Packaging Subtite with its dependencies.
Since Subtite uses Dynamic Linking with QT and FFMPEG (so it can remain LGPL compliant with those projects), there is a need to package the dependencies of Subtite when deploying. A deploy script can be run `./deploy/deploy.sh` (IMPORTANT: script has to be run from the project root) which will package the dependecies automatically.

In addition to the dependencies required to build Subtite, deploying also requires [Resource Hacker](http://www.angusj.com/resourcehacker/) on Windows, and [linuxdeployqt](https://github.com/probonopd/linuxdeployqt) on Linux.

On Windows only, the script requires setting `QT5_INSTALL_PATH` env variable to the directory where QT 5 is installed. This should look something like `C:\\Qt\\5.15.2\\msvc2019_64\\`.

On both Windows and Linux, the script requires setting `SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH` which is the path to the output directory that you want to write the deployed binaries to.

Example run:

```bash
SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH=/path/to/output/folder; ./deploy/deploy.sh
```

## Experimental
Some experimental binaries are also placed in the `subtitler/experimental` folder.
These contain some methods which are not ready to use in production but are interesting demos.

### Trimmer

`subtitler/experimental/trimmer_msvc.cpp` implements trimming of a video on windows.
You select a video, a timestamp file, and an output video path.

The timestamp file is of the syntax:

```
00:00:00 - 00:01:00
00:03:00 - 00:03:30
... etc ...
```
Will produce an output video with **only** the sections from `0s - 1min` and `3min - 3min 30s` of the original input video.

Trimmer can be built using
```
$ bazel build --config=vs2019 //subtitler/experimental/trimmer:trimmer
```

This functionality will eventually be integrated in the SubTite binary.

### Subtitle Burner (In production)
`subtitler/experimental/sub_burner.cpp` demonstrates how subtitles can be permanently burned into a video. It requires as input 3 command line flags:

```
--video_path: path to the input video file
--subtitle_path: path to the SRT subtitle file
--output_path: path to where the output file will be written
```

SubBurner can be built using
```
$ bazel build --config=vs2019 //subtitler/experimental/sub_burner:sub_burner
```

## Planned Features
### V1.1-2.0
* Support for subtitles of various fonts and colours
* Support simple video editing, such as cropping/trimming
* Support adding static images on top of the video between certain timestamps.
* Support for displaying audio waveforms along the timeline (similar to Audacity etc).

# Licensing
SubTite is available under [The Prosperity Public License 3.0.0](https://prosperitylicense.com/versions/3.0.0)
* If you use SubTite in a non-commercial manner, then you have permission to do so for free.
* If you use SubTite in any commercial manner, then you are subject to a 30-day free trial. After which, you must initiate contact directly to discuss a commercial licensing agreement.

## Attribution - SubTite uses the following projects:
### LGPL
* [FFMPEG](https://www.ffmpeg.org/legal.htmlhttps://www.ffmpeg.org/legal.html). Pre-built shared libraries are obtained from https://github.com/BtbN/FFmpeg-Builds/releases
* [Qt](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/lgpl.html) 

### MIT
* [nlohmann json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json/blob/develop/LICENSE.MIT)
* [howard hinnant date](https://github.com/HowardHinnant/date/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)
* [QT AV Player](https://github.com/Novacer/QtAVPlayer/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [csuft video timeline](https://github.com/csuft/VideoTimeline/blob/68df754ce0385e8f6d1f67cd8ee2dd0f9fcf67df/readme.md)

### BSD 3
* [gflags](https://github.com/gflags/gflags/blob/master/COPYING.txt)
* [googletest](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/main/LICENSE)

### Other
* [glog](https://github.com/google/glog/blob/master/COPYING)
* [bazel rules qt](https://github.com/Novacer/bazel_rules_qt/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [MS Speech Service SDK](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/)

Commit message:

Upgrade to latest version of MSVC (#138)
* upgrade to cpp20, remove some utf8 dependencies

* remove u8 literal which is deprecated in c++20

* remove unneeded copy

* Remove deprecated fs::u8path() references

* Remove deprecated u8 literal

* support newer versions of msvc

* Add step to build the GUI

* whitespace

* add env to set env var

* Try using asan in CI/CD build

* Revert "Try using asan in CI/CD build"

This reverts commit 175695488067b6357cb71535618dc4c36935e041.

README.md, after:

# SubTite: Easy way to create and add subtitles for your videos

![Latest Build Status](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)

**TLDR:** SubTite allows you to create subtitles using auto-transcription and edit them seamlessly in a video editor. The subtitles can be output as a separate SRT file, or combined with the video. Existing SRT files can be imported and edited effortlessly. The subtitles can be positioned in 9 different locations along the video. Support for trimming video, adding images, and other video editing features coming soon!

## GUI Demo
![gif demo](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/assets/29148427/c2afaac0-5111-4f7e-ad38-69b7f9757ad3)

## Feature Overview (Current v1.0.5)
* Supports Windows and Linux
* GUI + CLI for adding subtitles
* Subtitle Auto-transcription through MS Cognitive Services (windows only for now)
* Intuitive interface to make subtitling as fast and pain-free as possible
* Full UTF-8 Unicode support on Windows and Linux
* Subtitles can be positioned in 9 different locations: top right, middle center, bottom left etc.
* Added subtitles can immediately be previewed in a video player on the fly
* Existing subtitles (.srt) can be loaded and easily edited
* Video with subtitles can be exported either by remuxing to mkv or burning subtitles into the mp4.

## Installation

### To use the GUI
Download the appropriate binaries from the [releases section](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/releases)

### To use the CLI
Please refer to the [CLI docs](subtitler/cli/README.md)

## Usage

### Subtitle Editing
1. Select the video from the file dialog.
2. Select the subtitle file from the next file dialog. You can create a new subtitle file to start from scratch, or use an existing (.srt) file.
3. Position the yellow indicator at the subtitle's start position.
4. Right-click and select "Add interval at position".
5. Enter the subtitle text on the pane to the right.
6. (Optional) Select the subtitle position from one of the 9 positions.
7. Use mouse to adjust the subtitle's start and end time. Any changes are saved automatically.
8. Select `File > Export` if you want to combine the video and subtitles!

### Auto Transcription (Windows only for now)
1. Create a free [Microsoft Azure Account](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/free/cognitive-services/) (although it is free, they will require a credit card).
2. Create a [free speech resource](https://ms.portal.azure.com/#create/Microsoft.CognitiveServicesSpeechServices) in the Azure portal. Make sure to pick the free (F0) pricing tier! As of time of writing, this should give you 5 hours of free subtitle transcription per month.
3. Now you should have 2 API keys under "Keys and Endpoint" on the Azure portal. Copy one of them.
4. In subtite, select `Subtitle > Auto Transcribe`. Copy in your keys and also the Region of your speech instance. (For example, westus)
5. Enter a password to remember this information for next time. The password is ~~used~~ to encrypt the API keys to store on your local disk, and it is never passed anywhere else except to the Microsoft servers.
6. Choose the output location where the auto-transcribed subtitles will be saved.
7. Wait for your audio to be processed for auto-transcription!

## Building from source
SubTite is written in C++20 and uses Bazel v7.4.1 as the main build system. Setup your environment by [installing Bazelisk](https://bazel.build/install/bazelisk), which will use our [.bazelversion](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/blob/master/.bazelversion) file to pick the right version of Bazel.

### Windows

#### Dependency installation
Compiling for windows requires MSVC. You can download ["Build Tools for Visual Studio"](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/) to get the most recent compiler.

With bazel setup, here are some sample commands for building the CLI.

```bash
$ bazel build --config=msvc-prod //subtitler/cli:cli # Build CLI in release mode using MSVC2019
```

#### QT
Building the GUI requires QT 5.15.2 to be installed on your machine. We recommend using [aqtinstall](https://github.com/miurahr/aqtinstall) to make this easier. Run the following commands:

```bash
# Install aqt via pip
python -m pip install aqtinstall

# Confirm that win64_msvc2019_64 is available
python -m aqt list-qt windows desktop --arch 5.15.2 

# Install qt and all modules
python -m aqt install-qt windows desktop 5.15.2 win64_msvc2019_64 -m all
```

Next, find the directory where the directory `Qt\5.15.2\msvc2019_64\...` is installed. 

* Add `QT5_INSTALL_PATH` to your env variables, pointed at the `msvc2019_64` directory.
* Also add `QT_ROOT_DIR` to your env variables, pointed at the same directory.

#### Microsoft Speech Services SDK
We also require the Microsoft Speech Services SDK v1.47 to be installed. Use NuGet to install it in Powershell.

```pwsh
Register-PackageSource -Name nuget.org -Location https://www.nuget.org/api/v2 -ProviderName NuGet -Force

Install-Package Microsoft.CognitiveServices.Speech -ProviderName NuGet -RequiredVersion 1.47.0 -Force
```

Now you should see the files available at:

```
C:\\Program Files\\PackageManagement\\NuGet\\Packages\\Microsoft.CognitiveServices.Speech.1.47.0
```

Now you should be able to build the dev version of the GUI by running:

```bash
./build_gui_dev.sh
```

If you want to build the production version of the GUI, you'll also need to install ResourceHacker (details below).

#### Resource Hacker

Note that production builds will require one more depedency: [ResourceHacker](https://www.angusj.com/resourcehacker/). We use ResourceHacker
to set the icon for our binary. Download the ResourceHacker.exe and add it to your PATH variable.

Now you can compile the release binary via:

```bash
SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH=/path/to/output/folder; ./deploy/deploy.sh
```

### Linux

Compiling for linux requires GCC.

With bazel setup, here are some sample commands for building the CLI.

```bash
$ bazel build --config=gcc-prod //subttiler/cli:cli    # Build CLI in release mode using GCC
```

To compile the GUI, you will need to install various dependencies. 

```bash
sudo apt-get install -y qtbase5-dev qtchooser qt5-qmake qtbase5-dev-tools \
  qtmultimedia5-dev qttools5-dev-tools \
  libva-dev libsodium-dev
```

This should install QT 5 to one of the following locations.

```
/usr/include/x86_64-linux-gnu/qt5
or
/usr/include/qt
```

Now SubTite can be built all from one command:

```bash
bazel clean --expunge && ./build_gui_dev.sh
```
It is recommended to use the build script instead of compiling manually, since the build script ensures the correct runtime dependencies are copied to the right places. If the script doesn't work for you, here's how to compile manually.

---
First, `bazel build --config=gcc-prod //subtitler/gui:main`

Next, copy `bazel-subtitler/external/ffmpeg_linux/bin/ffmpeg` into `bazel-bin/subtitler/gui`. You should be ready to go from here.

## Build configs

The following build options are configured in [.bazelrc](https://github.com/Novacer/SubTite-add-subtitles-to-videos/blob/master/.bazelrc) of this project:
1. `--config=msvc-prod`. MSVC release mode
2. `--config=msvc-asan`. MSVC debug mode, with address sanitizer
3. `--config=msvc`. MSVC with bazel default settings (fastest build times)

`--config=gcc-prod`, `--config=gcc-asan`, and `--config=gcc` are the same as above, except it is for building on Linux using gcc.

Unit tests can be run using
```bash
$ bazel test --config=msvc-asan ... # used for running on windows
$ bazel test --config=gcc-asan ...    # used for running on linux
```

## Deploying - Packaging Subtite with its dependencies.
Since Subtite uses Dynamic Linking with QT and FFMPEG (so it can remain LGPL compliant with those projects), there is a need to package the dependencies of Subtite when deploying. A deploy script can be run `./deploy/deploy.sh` (IMPORTANT: script has to be run from the project root) which will package the dependecies automatically.

In addition to the dependencies required to build Subtite, deploying also requires [Resource Hacker](http://www.angusj.com/resourcehacker/) on Windows, and [linuxdeployqt](https://github.com/probonopd/linuxdeployqt) on Linux.

On Windows only, the script requires setting `QT5_INSTALL_PATH` env variable to the directory where QT 5 is installed. This should look something like `C:\\Qt\\5.15.2\\msvc2019_64\\`.

On both Windows and Linux, the script requires setting `SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH` which is the path to the output directory that you want to write the deployed binaries to.

Example run:

```bash
SUBTITE_RELEASE_PATH=/path/to/output/folder; ./deploy/deploy.sh
```

## Experimental
Some experimental binaries are also placed in the `subtitler/experimental` folder.
These contain some methods which are not ready to use in production but are interesting demos.

### Trimmer

`subtitler/experimental/trimmer_msvc.cpp` implements trimming of a video on windows.
You select a video, a timestamp file, and an output video path.

The timestamp file is of the syntax:

```
00:00:00 - 00:01:00
00:03:00 - 00:03:30
... etc ...
```
Will produce an output video with **only** the sections from `0s - 1min` and `3min - 3min 30s` of the original input video.

Trimmer can be built using
```
$ bazel build --config=msvc //subtitler/experimental/trimmer:trimmer
```

This functionality will eventually be integrated in the SubTite binary.

### Subtitle Burner (In production)
`subtitler/experimental/sub_burner.cpp` demonstrates how subtitles can be permanently burned into a video. It requires as input 3 command line flags:

```
--video_path: path to the input video file
--subtitle_path: path to the SRT subtitle file
--output_path: path to where the output file will be written
```

SubBurner can be built using
```
$ bazel build --config=msvc //subtitler/experimental/sub_burner:sub_burner
```

## Planned Features
### V1.1-2.0
* Support for subtitles of various fonts and colours
* Support simple video editing, such as cropping/trimming
* Support adding static images on top of the video between certain timestamps.
* Support for displaying audio waveforms along the timeline (similar to Audacity etc).

# Licensing
SubTite is available under [The Prosperity Public License 3.0.0](https://prosperitylicense.com/versions/3.0.0)
* If you use SubTite in a non-commercial manner, then you have permission to do so for free.
* If you use SubTite in any commercial manner, then you are subject to a 30-day free trial. After which, you must initiate contact directly to discuss a commercial licensing agreement.

## Attribution - SubTite uses the following projects:
### LGPL
* [FFMPEG](https://www.ffmpeg.org/legal.htmlhttps://www.ffmpeg.org/legal.html). Pre-built shared libraries are obtained from https://github.com/BtbN/FFmpeg-Builds/releases
* [Qt](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/lgpl.html) 

### MIT
* [nlohmann json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json/blob/develop/LICENSE.MIT)
* [howard hinnant date](https://github.com/HowardHinnant/date/blob/master/LICENSE.txt)
* [QT AV Player](https://github.com/Novacer/QtAVPlayer/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [csuft video timeline](https://github.com/csuft/VideoTimeline/blob/68df754ce0385e8f6d1f67cd8ee2dd0f9fcf67df/readme.md)

### BSD 3
* [gflags](https://github.com/gflags/gflags/blob/master/COPYING.txt)
* [googletest](https://github.com/google/googletest/blob/main/LICENSE)

### Other
* [glog](https://github.com/google/glog/blob/master/COPYING)
* [bazel rules qt](https://github.com/Novacer/bazel_rules_qt/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [libsodium](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium/blob/master/LICENSE)
* [MS Speech Service SDK](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/speech-service/)
